RedLeaf is an operating system developed in Rust, leveraging Rust's type and memory safety. Its goal is to achieve lightweight, fine-grained isolation, while relying on language safety to provide isolation between processes, eliminating the need for costly hardware context switches. Specifically, the system defines five principles to achieve fault isolation using Rust: (1) Heap Isolation, which is crucial for terminating and unloading crashing domains; (2) Exchangeable Types; (3) Ownership Tracking, which is needed for the deallocation of resources owned by a crashing domain on the shared heap; (4) Interface Validation; and (5) Cross-Domain Call Proxying, which mediates all cross-domain invocations. They also developed an Interface Definition Language (IDL) that statically validates cross-domain interface definitions and generates implementations for them. To test these principles, they implemented RedLeaf as a microkernel system where a set of isolated domains provide the functionality of the kernel. They also show it is possible to transparently recover crashing device drivers. Finally, RedLeaf perform competitively with its Linux counterparts, suggesting that ownership reasoning is not a barrier to performance. 

Verve is a mechanically verified operating system that guarantees type and memory safety. It aims to use safe languages to improve the reliability and security of low-level systems. Verve requires every part of the software stack (except for the boot loader) to be verified for safety. To achieve this efficiently, the OS is split into two layers: the Nucleus and the Kernel. The low-level Nucleus provides essential runtime abstractions for hardware and memory, while the higher-level Kernel, which offers additional services, sits on top of the Nucleus. All access to low-level functionality must go through the Nucleus. Two different automated verification tools are used: Typed Assembly Language (TAL) for the Kernel and the SMT theorem prover Boogie for the Nucleus. The reason for this two-layer approach is to combine lower-level untyped code with higher-level typed code in a verifiably safe way. The Nucleus contains a minimal set of functions necessary to support the TAL code, minimizing Boogie’s verification overhead. For the limited set of functions in the Nucleus, preconditions and postconditions are annotated for verification. A fundamental limitation of Verve is that it only supports single-processor systems and does not address concurrency. However, the small size of the annotated Nucleus and the relatively short time required for automated verification suggest that this approach could be feasible for developing verified low-level systems.

Both papers aim to develop a safe OS by using some level of isolation between components to achieve system reliability and safety. RedLeaf uses language-level safety features provided by Rust for fault isolation. It leverages Rust's memory and type safety guarantees to achieve heap isolation, ownership tracking, and its other principals. However, Verve provides formal guarantees of correctness at the binary level, though at the cost of greater complexity due to the verification process. RedLeaf offers more flexibility and usability for general users and places a stronger emphasis on performance, aiming to be competitive with Linux. Verve, however, prioritizes correctness, by its rigorous mechanical verification process. 

1. How do each system’s usability and development complexity compare? Specifically, as the kernel evolves and grows larger, what are the costs associated with adapting these safe kernels accordingly?

2. Both RedLeaf and Verve have some limitations: Verve does not support concurrency, and RedLeaf has significantly fewer features compared to Linux. How well do you think their core concepts/idea will allow them to evolve and keep pace with established OS's ecosystems in the long run?